# Introduction

The primary challenges posed by these datasets (and many biological datasets) are the low number of data points and the high dimensionality. The goal of this project is to survey a wide variety of methods to combat these challenges and evaluate their performance.

Furthermore, these data are generated by RNA-seq. While the current paradigm in machine learning is to pretrain a large model on vast quantities of data which can be subsequently fine-tuned for specific purposes, that is not feasible here. Most pretrained models that utilize biological data use data from single-cell methods, and the ones that don't expect a fixed set of input genes. The irregular nature and low number of data points inherent in traditional bulk RNA-seq data makes this new strategy extremely difficult if not impossible to apply. 

As such, we must rely on traditional methods and older, simpler algorithms. The small number of data points makes many newer generative and deep learning models infeasible to use.

The biggest problem now is the high dimensionality of the datasets, which can oustrip the number of data points by several orders of magnitude. Since the number of data points in each dataset makes validation challenging, we will survey numerous datasets to estimate how generalizable these findings are to any given set of bulk RNA-seq data.

# Datasets

We plan to survey the performance of classification algorithms on the following datasets:

- **Name:** Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease comparison: peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS1615
	- **Size:** 127×22283
- **Name:** Squamous cell lung carcinomas.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS2373
	- **Size:** 130×22283
- **Name:** Large airway epithelial cells from cigarette smokers with suspect lung cancer.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS2771
	- **Size:** 192×22283
- **Name:** Myelodysplastic syndrome: CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS3795
	- **Size:** 200×54675
- **Name:** Pediatric acute leukemia patients with early relapse: white blood cells.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS4206
	- **Size:** 197×54675
- **Name:** HIV infection and Antiretroviral Therapy effects on mitochondria in various tissues.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS4228
	- **Size:** 166×4825
- **Name:** Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis and non-systemic JIA subtypes: peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS4267
	- **Size:** 154×54675
- **Name:** Long-term adult survivors of glioblastoma: primary tumors.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS5205
	- **Size:** 70×54675
- **Name:** Macular degeneration and dermal fibroblast response to sublethal oxidative stress.
	- **GEO accession number:** GDS963
	- **Size:** 36×12625

# Models

We plan to survey the performance of the following classification algorithms:

- Decision Tree (DT)
- Random Forest (RF)
- Naïve Bayes Classifier (NBC)
- Support Vector Machine (SVM)
- *k*-Nearest Neighbours (*k*-NN)

# Strategies to Combat High Dimensionality

The high dimensionality of the datasets poses numerous problems (the “curse of dimensionality”) especially given how few data points each one has. There are a variety of methods to reduce the dimensionality. We will survey the following strategies:

- **Strategy 1:** Do Nothing
	- This strategy will serve as a base point.
- **Strategy 2:** *a prior* Grouping
	- The data dimension can be reduced by aggregating the features based on *a priori* biological knowledge (i.e. GO categorization)
- **Strategy 3:** Principle Component Analysis
	- PCA is commonly used in the biological sciences, and cutting the dimension down to only the directions that preserve the highest variance can cut out a lot of noise.
- **Strategy 4:** Kernelized Principle Component Analysis
	- The PCA method can be kernelized to accomodate for a nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Here, we used the RBF kernel.
- **Strategy 5:** Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
	- NMF is another commonly-used method to reduce the dimensionality in biology that does not recenter the data. Here, we allowed the method to run for up to 200 iterations to converge.